Ajmer () is the city in the Indian state of Rajasthan and is the centre of the eponymous Ajmer District. According to the 2011 census, Ajmer has a population of around 551,360 in its urban agglomeration and 542,580 in the city. The city is located at a distance of 135 km from the state capital Jaipur and 391 km from the national capital New Delhi.
Ajmer is surrounded by the Aravalli Mountains. It is a pilgrimage centre for the shrine of the Sufi Saint Khwaja Moinuddin Chishti and is also the base for visiting Pushkar (11 km), an ancient Hindu pilgrimage city, famous for the temple of Brahma.
Prithviraj Chauhan (11491192 CE), of the Chauhan dynasty, ruled Ajmer along with Delhi during the latter half of the 12th century. He succeeded to the throne at the age of 13, and ruled from the twin capitals of Ajmer and Delhi, and was the last independent Hindu king to sit upon the throne of Delhi.
Ajmer has been selected as one of the heritage cities for HRIDAY - Heritage City Development and Augmentation Yojana scheme of Government of India.
Ajmer, earlier known as 'Ajayameru' (Sanskrit: , lit. invincible mountain) was founded in the late 7th century A.D. by Ajayraj Singh Chauhan. Chauhan clan is a branch of Rajputs. The Chauhan dynasty ruled Ajmer in spite of repeated invasions by Turkic Muslim armies from Central Asia across the north of India. Ajmer was conquered by Muhammad of Ghor, founder of the Delhi Sultanate, in 1193. However, the Chauhan rulers were able to gain autonomy upon the payment of a heavy tribute to him. Ajmer regained independence under the ruler of Mewar in 1365. In 1509, control of Ajmer was disputed between the Maharajas of Mewar and Marwar until it was conquered by the Marwar in 1532. In 1553, the state was ruled by the Hindu Emperor Hem Chandra Vikramaditya, popularly known as Hemu, who was killed in 1556 in the Second Battle of Panipat. The city was conquered by the Mughal emperor Akbar in 1559. In the early 1700s century, control passed to the Marathas.
In 1818 the British forced the Marathas to cede the city for 50,000 rupees, whereupon it became part of the Province of Ajmer-Marwar in the colonial British Raj. It consisted of the districts of Ajmer and Merwara, and were physically separated by the territory of the Rajputana Agency. Ajmer-Marwar was directly administered by the British Raj, by a commissioner who was subordinate to the Governor-General's agent for Rajputana.
Ajmer-Marwar remained a province of India until 1950, when it became the Ajmer State. Ajmer state became part of Rajasthan state on 1 November 1956.
Ajmer is surrounded by the Aravalli Mountains. The city is sied on the lower slopes of the Taragarh Hill in the Aravalli Range. It is situated almost in the centre of Rajasthan. To the north of the city is a large artificial lake, called Anasagar with a marble structure known as Baradari. Ajmer is protected from the Thar desert by the massive rocks of Nagpathar range.
Ajmer is also antipodal to the Chilean remote island of Isla Sala y Gmez.
Ajmer has a hot semi-arid climate with over 55 centimetres (25.4 in) of rain every year, but most of the rain occurs in the Monsoon months, between June and September. Temperatures remain relatively high throughout the year, with the summer months of April to early July having an average daily temperature of about 30 C (86 F). During the monsoon there are frequent heavy rains and thunderstorms but flooding is not a common occurrence. The winter months of November to February are mild and temperate with average temperatures ranging from 1518 C (5964 F) with little or no humidity. There are, however, occasional cold weather fronts that cause temperatures to fall to near freezing levels.
Ajmer is well connected to the major cities of India by land and rail.
Work on the Kishangarh Airport near Ajmer was inaugurated by Prime Minister Manmohan Singh in September 2013 and it is expected to commence operations in 2016. At present the nearest airport is the Jaipur International Airport, about 132 km away, with daily flights to the major cities in India.
Ajmer is at an important railway junction on the Broad gauge Jaipur-Ahmedabad line. Presently, the rail lines are without overhead Electric wires i.e. only Diesel engines can be run on them. Electrification of the railway lines is under progress, starting with Ajmer-Jaipur line and Ajmer-Udaipur line.
The city is located on the Golden Quadrilateral National Highway 8 (NH 8) midway between Delhi and Mumbai, about 400 km from Delhi and 135 km from Jaipur. The Ajmer - Jaipur expressway is a 6 lane highway. There are air-conditioned bus services to Ajmer from Delhi, Jaipur and other cities.
Buses and taxis are available for travel within the city and to nearby towns such as Pushkar and Kishangarh. Rickshaws are also available within the city.
Ajmer Sightseeing: 
On the way to Prithviraj Chauhan Statue, the famous Sai Baba temple is also an important tourist destination which is having same architecture as that of Sai Baba temple in Shirdi.
Located about 11 kilometres from Ajmer Pushkar is also an important tourist destination. It is famous for Pushkar Lake and the 14th century Brahma Temple at Pushkar, dedicated to Brahm, according to the Padma Pura, Pushkar is the only place where Brahm may be worshipped. There is a general belief amongst Hindus that no pilgrimage to the four principal pilgrim centres (Char Dham) namely, Badrinath, Jagannath, Rameshwaram and Dwarka, would be complete without a blessing that comes from bathing in the holy Pushkar Lake. Pushkar has 52 bathing ghats and many temples. Pushkar is also famous for its annual Pushkar Fair.
Ajmer is home to antiques and silver jewellery. It is also popular for shopping items like bandhini sarees and dupattas, Jodhpuri juttis, ittar (perfume), Rajasthani crafts, etc. Some of the famous markets are Naya Bazaar, Madar Gate, Churi Bazaar, Ajaymeru Udyog Crafts Mela.
it is the site of Dayanand College. The origin of Dayanand College, Ajmer is unique in way more than one. The college owes its existence neither to the zeal of an educationist, nor to that of a social reformer. It was in the year 1888 Pt. Jiyalalji thought of setting up a school for imparting value oriented education. In due course of time,incessant efforts of Pt. Jiyalalji and later of Prof. D.Vable transforming that little school into a leading college.
Mayo College was founded by the British Raj in 1875 to educate the children of India's royalty under mayo college general council two more schools were built in later half of 20th century Mayo college girls school(girls boarding) and Mayoor school(day school)both these schools are built on land given by Mayo college once part of its campus and hence located nearby . Ajmer is also home to Saint Anselms School (1904), St. Mary's Convent Girls' School, Sophia Girls' School (1918/1935) & College (1943, and the historic Ajmer Music College (1942), the first accredited institution in Rajasthan for teaching Hindustani classical music.
JIALAL INSTITUTE OF EDUCATION: Jialal Teachers Training Institution was established by the Arya Samj Education Committee, Ajmer in the year of 1963 in the name of the late Pandit Jialalji who was a Famous social worker and also a great Arya Samaj Devotee. the credit of establishing this also goes to exprincipal of Dayanand College, Sh. Duttatery Arya. The foundation stone laid by the Education Minister Late Hari Bhau Upadhyaya on 17 February 1964 and real systematic Inauguration was done by the Governor of Rajasthan in 1965 Dr. Sampurnand . The Institution was established to the follow the traditions of protecting, propagating and preaching vedic religion.
Government Polytechnic College Ajmer at Makhupura Ajmer offers various diploma courses in Civil Engineering, Computer Science And Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Electronics Engineering, Instrumentation Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering (Auto) and Printing Technology.
Regional Institute of Education Capt. D.P Choudhary Marg,Ajmer-305004 is National Council of Educational Research and Training under CBSE research program.
It is home to Maharshi Dayanand Saraswati University, Ajmer established on 1 August 1987.The teaching departments and centres of learning at the university campus include Botany, Commerce, Computer Science, Economics, Education, Environmental Science, Food Science and Nutrition, History, Journalism, Law, Library and Information Science, Management Studies, Microbiology, Political Science, Population Studies, Pure & Applied Chemistry, Remote Sensing and Geoinformatics, Sanskrit, Yogic Sciences and Human Consciousness, Zoology and Center for Entrepreneurship and Small Business Management (CESBM). There are 226 Government and Private Colleges affiliated to this University, which are spread over 4 districts of the state of Rajasthan.
The headquarter of Board of Secondary Education Rajasthan (BSER) is in Ajmer.
Yet one more famous institution Regional College Ajmer offering a variety of undergraduate and graduate programs
The Central University of Rajasthan is also situated near Kishangarh.
The city also houses JLN Medical College proving MBBS, MD and DM course training in various fields including cardiology.
Source:
According to the 2011 India census, Ajmer district has a population of 2,584,913, which was made up of 1,325,911 males and 1,259,002 females. Ajmer district had an average literacy rate of 70.46 percent, male literacy being 83.93% and female literacy 56.42%. There was a total of 1,557,264 literates compared to 1,168,856 in the 2001 census. The population density in Ajmer district was 305 compared to 257 per km2 in 2001. The female to male ratio in Ajmer was 950/1000. This represents an increase of 2.04% from the 2001 census. Ajmer's population growth in the decade was 18.48%, this compares to a growth figure of 20.93% for the previous decade.The population of Ajmer city according census 2011 is 542,580 positioning Ajmer in top 100 major cities of India and 5th in Rajasthan.
