Common symptoms include increased vaginal discharge that usually smells like fish. The discharge is often white or gray in color. There may be burning with urination. Occasionally there may be no symptoms.
The discharge coats the walls of the vagina, and is usually without significant irritation, pain, or erythema (redness), although mild itching can sometimes occur. By contrast, the normal vaginal discharge will vary in consistency and amount throughout the menstrual cycle and is at its clearest at ovulationabout 2 weeks before the period starts. Some practitioners claim that BV can be asymptomatic in almost half of affected women, though others argue that this is often a misdiagnosis.
Healthy vaginal microbiota consists of species which do not cause symptoms, infections, or negatively affect pregnancy. It is dominated mainly by Lactobacillus species. BV is defined by the disequilibrium in the vaginal microbiota with decline in the number of lactobacilli. While the infection involves a number of bacteria, it is believed that most infections start with Gardnerella vaginalis creating a biofilm which allows other opportunistic bacteria to thrive.
One of the main risks for developing BV is douching, which alters the vaginal flora and predisposes women to developing BV. Douching is strongly discouraged by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and various medical authorities, for this and other reasons.
BV is a risk factor for pelvic inflammatory disease, HIV, sexually transmitted infections (STIs), and reproductive and obstetric disorders or negative outcomes. It is possible for sexually inactive persons to develop bacterial vaginosis.
Bacterial vaginosis may sometimes affect women after menopause. Subclinical iron deficiency may correlate with bacterial vaginosis in early pregnancy. A longitudinal study published in February 2006 in the American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology showed a link between psychosocial stress and bacterial vaginosis persisted even when other risk factors were taken into account. Exposure to the spermicide nonoxynol-9 does not affect the risk of developing bacterial vaginosis.
Having a female partner increases the risk of BV by 60%. The bacteria associated with BV have been isolated from male genitalia. BV microbiota has been found in the penis, coronal sulcus, and male urethra, in the male partners of infected females. Those uncircumcised partners may act as a reservoir increasing the likelihood of acquiring an infection after sexual intercourse. Another mode of transmission of the BV-associated microbiota is to a female sexual partner via the skin-to-skin transfer. BV may be transmitted via the perineal enteric bacteria from the microbiota of the female and male genitalia.
To make a diagnosis of bacterial vaginosis, a swab from inside the vagina should be obtained. These swabs should be tested for:
Two positive results in addition to the discharge itself are enough to diagnose BV. If there is no discharge, then all three criteria are needed.Differential diagnosis for bacterial vaginosis includes the following:
The Center For Disease Control (CDC) defines STIs as "a variety of clinical syndromes and infections caused by pathogens that can be acquired and transmitted through sexual activity." But the CDC does not specifically identify BV as sexually transmitted infection.
In clinical practice BV can be diagnosed using the Amsel criteria:
At least three of the four criteria should be present for a confirmed diagnosis.A modification of the Amsel criteria accepts the presence of two instead of three factors and is considered equally diagnostic.
An alternative is to use a Gram-stained vaginal smear, with the Hay/Ison criteria or the Nugent criteria. The Hay/Ison criteria are defined as follows:
Gardnerella vaginalis is the main culprit in BV. Gardnerella vaginalis is a short rod (coccobacillus). Hence, the presence of clue cells and gram variable coccobacilli are indicative or diagnostic of bacterial vaginosis.
The Nugent Score is now rarely used by physicians due to the time it takes to read the slides and requires the use of a trained microscopist. A score of 0-10 is generated from combining three other scores. The scores are as follows:
At least 1020 high power (1000 oil immersion) fields are counted and an average determined.
|Gardnerella / Bacteroides morphotypes average per high powered (1000 oil immersion) field. View multiple fields.
Curved Gram variable rods average per high powered (1000 oil immersion) field. View multiple fields (note that this factor is less important scores of only 02 are possible)
|
|
DNA hybridization testing with Affirm VPIII was compared to the Gram stain using the Nugent criteria. The Affirm VPIII test may be used for the rapid diagnosis of BV in symptomatic women but uses expensive proprietary equipment to read results, and does not detect other pathogens that cause BV, including Prevotella spp, Bacteroides spp, & Mobiluncus spp.
Some steps suggested to lower the risk include: not douching, avoiding sex, or limiting the number of sex partners.
One review concluded that probiotics may help prevent re-occurrence. Another review found that while there is tentative evidence it is not strong enough to recommend their use for this purpose.
Antibiotic treatment of male partners could re-establish the normal microbiota of the male urogenital tract. BV-associated bacteria in or on the male genitals may promote relapse, reinfection of, women with BV. Treating the male partner is an effective and safe intervention and offers the advantage of preventing the recurrence of infection.
Treatment is typically with the antibiotics metronidazole or clindamycin. They can be either given by mouth or applied inside the vagina. About 10% to 15% of people; however, do not improve with the first course of antibiotics and recurrence rates of up to 80% have been documented. Recurrence rates are increased with sexual activity with the same pre-/posttreatment partner and inconsistent condom use although estrogen-containing contraceptives decrease recurrence. When clindamycin is given to pregnant women symptomatic with BV before 22 weeks of gestation the risk of pre-term birth before 37 weeks of gestation is lower.
Other antibiotics that may work include macrolides, lincosamides, nitroimidazoles, and penicillins.
Bacterial vaginosis is not considered a sexually transmitted infection, and treatment of a male sexual partner of a woman with bacterial vaginosis is not recommended.
A 2009 Cochrane review found tentative but insufficient evidence for probiotics as a treatment for BV. A 2014 review reached the same conclusion. A 2013 review found some evidence supporting the use of probiotics during pregnancy.
Although previously considered a mere nuisance infection, untreated bacterial vaginosis may cause complications, such as increased susceptibility to sexually transmitted infections including HIV and pregnancy complications.
It has been shown that HIV-infected women with bacterial vaginosis (BV) are more likely to transmit HIV to their sexual partners than those without BV. Diagnostic criteria for BV have also been associated with a female genital tract factor that induces expression of HIV.
There is evidence of an association between BV and increased rates of sexually transmitted infections such as HIV/AIDS. BV is associated with up to a six-fold increase in HIV shedding. There is also a correlation between the absence of vaginal lactobacilli and infection by Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia trachomatis. BV is a risk factor for viral shedding and herpes simplex virus type 2 infection. BV may increase the risk infection or reactivation of human papillomavirus (HPV).
In addition, bacterial vaginosis an intercurrent disease in pregnancy may increase the risk of pregnancy complications, most notably premature birth or miscarriage.Pregnant women with BV have a higher risk of chorioamnionitis, miscarriage, preterm birth, premature rupture of membranes, and postpartum endometritis. BV is associated with gynaecological and obstetric complications. Data suggest an association between BV, tubal factor infertility, and pelvic inflammatory disease. Women with BV who are treated with vitro fertilization have a lower implantation rate and higher rates of early pregnancy loss.
BV is the most common infection of the vagina in women of reproductive age. The percentage of women affected at any given time varies between 5% and 70%. BV is most common in parts of Africa, and least common in Asia and Europe. In the United States, about 30% of those between the ages of 14 and 49 are affected. Rates vary considerably between ethnic groups within a country.
