In linguistics, cognates are words that have a common etymological origin. In etymology, the cognate category excludes doublets and loan words. The word cognate derives from the Latin noun , which means "blood relative".
Cognates do not need to have the same meaning, which may have changed as the languages developed separately. For example, consider English  and Dutch  or German  ("to die"); these three words all derive from the same Proto-Germanic root,  ("die"). English  and German  ("table"), with their flat surfaces, both come from Latin , but it would be a mistake to identify their later meanings as the same. Discus is from Greek  (from the verb  "to throw"). A later and separate English reflex of discus, probably through medieval Latin desca, is  (see OED s.v. desk).
Cognates also do not need to have obviously similar forms, e.g. English , French , and Armenian  (hayr) all descend directly from Proto-Indo-European *phtr.
Examples of cognates in Indo-European languages are the words night (English), nuit (French), Nacht (German), nacht (Dutch), nag (Afrikaans), nicht (Scots), natt (Swedish, Norwegian), nat (Danish), ntt (Faroese), ntt (Icelandic), noc (Czech, Slovak, Polish), , noch (Russian), , no (Macedonian), , nosht (Bulgarian), , nich (Ukrainian), , noch/no (Belarusian), no (Slovene), no (Bosnian, Serbian, Croatian), , nyx (Ancient Greek, /nychta in Modern Greek), nox/nocte (Latin), nakt- (Sanskrit), nat (Albanian), noche (Spanish), nos (Welsh), nueche (Asturian), noite (Portuguese and Galician), notte (Italian), nit (Catalan), nuch/nuit (Occitan), noapte (Romanian), nakts (Latvian), naktis (Lithuanian) and Naach (Colognian), all meaning "night" and derived from the Proto-Indo-European (PIE) , "night".
Another Indo-European example is star (English), str- (Sanskrit), tara (Hindustani and Bengali), tora (Assamese), astre/toile (French),  (astr) (Greek or /, asteri/astro in Modern Greek), astro/stella (Italian), aster (Latin) stea (Romanian and Venetian), stairno (Gothic), astl (Armenian), Stern (German), ster (Dutch and Afrikaans), Schthn (Colognian), starn (Scots), stjerne (Norwegian and Danish), stjarna (Icelandic), stjrna (Swedish), stjrna (Faroese), setre (Persian), stoorei (Pashto), seren (Welsh), steren (Cornish), estel (Catalan), estela (Occitan) estrella and astro Spanish, estrella Asturian and Leonese, estrela and astro (Portuguese and Galician) and estre or strk (Kurdish), from the PIE , "star".
The Hebrew  shalom, the Arabic  salm, the Assyrian Neo-Aramaic shlama and the Amharic selam ("peace") are also cognates, derived from Proto-Semitic .
Cognates may often be less easily recognised than the above examples, and authorities sometimes differ in their interpretations of the evidence. The English word  is clearly a cognate of German , Dutch , Russian  and (Bosnian, Serbian, Croatian) . On the other hand, French , Catalan llet, Italian latte, Romanian , Spanish  and  (Portuguese and Galician) (all meaning "milk") are less obviously cognates of Ancient Greek  glaktos (genitive singular of  gla, "milk"), a relationship more evidently seen through the intermediate Latin  "milk", as well as the English word  and other terms borrowed from Latin.
At times, cognates may be semantic opposites. For instance, while the Hebrew word  chutzpah means "impudence," its Classical Arabic cognate  afah means "sound judgment." English  and Polish , meaning white, are cognates with opposite meanings, both deriving from the PIE , meaning, "to burn or shine."
Cognate doublets can exist within the same language, with meanings that are slightly to totally different. For example, English ward and guard (<PIE , "to perceive, watch out for") are cognates, as are shirt (garment on top) and skirt (garment on bottom) (<PIE , "to cut"). In some cases, such as "shirt" and "skirt", one of the cognate pairs has an ultimate source in another language related to English, while the other one is native, as happened with many loanwords from Old Norse borrowed during the Danelaw. Sometimes, both cognates come from other languages, often the same one but at different times. For example, the word chief (meaning the leader of any group) comes from the Middle French chef ("head"), and its modern pronunciation preserves the Middle French consonant sound; the word chef (the leader of the cooks) was borrowed from the same source centuries later, by which time the consonant had changed to a "sh"-sound in French. Such word sets can also be called etymological twins, and of course they may come in groups of higher numbers, as with, for example, the words wain (native), waggon/wagon (Dutch) and vehicle (Latin) in English.
A word may also enter another language, develop a new form or meaning there, and be re-borrowed into the original language; this is called reborrowing. For example, the Greek word  (kinma, "movement") became French cinma (cf. American English movie) and then later returned to Greece as  (sinema, "the art of film", "movie theater"). Now in Greece  (kinma, "movement") and  (sinema, "filmmaking, cinema") exist together as a doublet.
An example of very different and non-obvious English-language doublets is  and .
False cognates are words that people commonly believe are related (have a common origin), but that linguistic examination reveals are unrelated. For example, on the basis of superficial similarities, the Latin verb habre and German haben, both meaning 'to have', appear to be cognates. However, because of the way words in the two languages evolved from Proto-Indo-European (PIE) roots, they cannot be cognate (see for example Grimm's law). German haben, like English have, comes from PIE  'to grasp', and its real cognate in Latin is capere, 'to seize, grasp, capture'. Latin habre, on the other hand, is from PIE *gab, 'to give, to receive', and hence cognate with English give and German geben.
Likewise, English much and Spanish mucho look similar and have a similar meaning but are not cognates, as they evolved from different roots: much from Proto-Germanic  < PIE  and mucho from Latin multum < PIE .
