A Covenant-breaker or the act of Covenant-breaking is a term used by Bah's to refer to a form of disunity: "The specific mission of Bah'u'llh relates to world unity. Since it would be impossible for the Bah' Faith to unite the world if it were itself disunited, the role of the covenant as the guarantor of the unity of the Bah' community becomes inextricably linked with the goal of world unity: "It is evident that the axis of oneness of the world of humanity is the power of the Covenant and nothing else." (TDP 49, cf GPB 239, SWA 208-9).Being declared a Covenant-breaker is done by the head of the Faith — which is the Universal House of Justice, which has nine members and is the governing body of the Bah's since 1963. Bah's avoid association with Covenant-breakers, even if they are a family member. 
Covenant-breaking does not refer to attacks from non-Bah's or former Baha'is. Rather, it is in reference to internal campaigns of opposition where the Covenant-breaker is challenging the unity of the Faith, causing internal division, or by claiming or supporting an alternate succession of authority or administrative structure. The central purpose of the covenant is to prevent schism and dissension.In a letter to an individual dated 23 March 1975, the Universal House of Justice wrote:
The term 'Covenant-breaker' or, in Arabic 'naqid al-mithaq' [pl. Naqidu 'l-mithaq], was first used by `Abdu'l-Bah to describe the partisans of his brother Mrz Muhammad `Al, who challenged his leadership. In `Abdu'l-Bah's Will and Testament, He appointed Shoghi Effendi as the Guardian of the religion and called for the eventual election of the Universal House of Justice, and defined in the same manner opposition to these two institutions as Covenant-Breaking. `Abdu'l-Bah advised all Bah's to shun anyone opposing the Covenant: "...one of the greatest and most fundamental principles of the Cause of God is to shun and avoid entirely the Covenant-breakers, for they will utterly destroy the Cause of God, exterminate His Law and render of no account all efforts exerted in the past."
While most Covenant-breakers are involved in schismatic groups, that is not always the case. For example, a Bah' who refuses to follow guidance on treatment of Covenant-breakers is at risk of being named one. One article originally written for the Bah' Encyclopedia, characterized Covenant-breakers that have emerged in the course of Bah' history as belonging to one of four categories:
Shoghi Effendi wrote to the National Spiritual Assembly of Canada in 1957:
Beyond this, many other relationships to the Bah' Faith exist, both positive and negative. Covenant-breaking does not apply to most of them. The following is a partial list of those who could not rightly be termed Covenant-breakers:
Bbs are generally regarded as another religion altogether. Since Covenant-breaking presumes that one has submitted oneself to a covenant and then broken it, and Bbs never recognized or swore allegiance to Bah'u'llh, they are not Covenant-breakers.
Followers of Subh-i-Azal, Bah'u'llh's half-brother who tried to poison him, engaged in active opposition to Bah's, and Shoghi Effendi did inform Bah's that they should avoid contact with his descendants, writing that "No intelligent and loyal Baha'i would associate with a descendant of Azal, if he traced the slightest breath of criticism of our Faith, in any aspect, from that person. In fact these people should be strenuously avoided as having an inherited spiritual disease -- the disease of Covenant-breaking!".
Through the influence of Bahiyyih Khanum, the eldest daughter of Bah'u'llh, everyone in the household initially rallied around Shoghi Effendi after the death of `Abdu'l-Bah. For several years his brother Husayn and several cousins served him as secretaries. The only ones publicly opposing him were Mirza Muhammad-Ali and his followers, who were declared Covenant-breakers by `Abdu'l-Bah. Contrary to `Abdu'l-Bah's specific instruction, certain family members established illicit links with those declared Covenant-breakers by `Abdu'l-Bah. After Bahiyyih Khanum died in 1932, Shoghi Effendi's eldest sister--Ruhangiz --married a son of Siyyid Ali Afnan. Bah'u'llh's son-in-law was, thus, a long-standing enemy of `Abdu'l-Bah (who had declared him a Covenant-breaker.) Through Ruhangiz's efforts, Shoghi Effendi's other sister and his cousin Thurayya also married sons of Siyyid Ali Afnan. Presumably being faced with a choice between shunning their disobedient family members and being themselves disobedient to `Abdu'l-Bah and Shoghi Effendi, his cousins, aunts and uncles chose the latter.
After years of silence on these developments, cables sent by Shoghi Effendi on 2 November 1941 provide background to developments among family members. Ruhi Afnan, Shoghi Effendi's cousin through `Abdu'l-Bah's daughter Tuba:
Then in a 1950 cable:
And in 1953:
Later, Ruhi was presented with a copy of Sohrab's book about his excommunication:
Concerning Munib Shahid, Shoghi Effendi's cousin through `Abdu'l-Bah's daughter Ruha, Shoghi Effendi sent the following cable to the Bah' world in November 1944:
Concerning his own brother Husayn, Shoghi Effendi sent the following cable to the Bah' world in April 1945:
Concerning his own brother Riaz, the following cable was sent in December 1951:
He dispatched a cable concerning his younger sister in December 1941:
Most of the groups regarded by the larger group of Bah's as Covenant-breakers originated in the claims of Charles Mason Remey to the Guardianship in 1960. The Will and Testament of `Abdu'l-Bah states that Guardians should be lineal descendants of Bah'u'llh, that each Guardian must select his successor during his lifetime, and that the nine Hands of the Cause of God permanently stationed in the holy land must approve the appointment by majority vote. Bah's interpret lineal descendency to mean physical familial relation to Bah'u'llh, of which Mason Remey was not.
Almost all of Bah's accepted the determination of the Hands of the Cause that upon the death of Shoghi Effendi, he died "without having appointed his successor". There was an absence of a valid descendant of Bah'u'llh who could qualify under the terms of `Abdu'l-Bah's will. Later the Universal House of Justice, initially elected in 1963, made a ruling on the subject that it was not possible for another Guardian to be appointed.
In 1960 Remey, a Hand of the Cause himself, retracted his earlier position, and claimed to have been coerced. He claimed to be the successor to Shoghi Effendi. He and the small number of people who followed him were expelled from the Faith by the Hands of the Cause. Those close to Remey claimed that he went senile in old age, and by the time of his death he was largely abandoned, with his most prominent followers fighting amongst themselves for leadership. [Citation needed.]
The largest group of the remaining followers of Remey, members of the so called "Orthodox Bah' Faith", believe that legitimate authority passed from Shoghi Effendi to Mason Remey to Joel Marangella. [Citation needed.] They, therefore, regard the Universal House of Justice in Haifa, Israel to be illegitimate, and its members and followers to be Covenant-breakers. [Citation needed.]
The present descendants of expelled members of Bah'u'llh's family have not specifically been declared Covenant-breakers, though they mostly do not associate themselves with the Bah' religion. [Citation needed.] A small group of Bah's in Northern New Mexico believe that these descendants are eligible for appointment to the Guardianship and are waiting for such a direct descendant of Bah'u'llh to arise as the rightful Guardian.
There is also a small group in Montana, originally formed around the personality of Leland Jensen, who claimed a status higher than that of the Guardian. His failed apocalyptic predictions and unsuccessful efforts to reestablish the Guardianship and the administration were apparent by his death in 1996. A dispute among Jensen's followers over the identity of the Guardian resulted in another division in 2001.[Citation needed.]
