The Czech Republic is a Central European country, a member of the European Union, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OSCE), the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the United Nations (and all of its main specialized agencies and boards). It entertains diplomatic relations with 191 countries in the world, around half of which maintain a resident embassy in the Czech capital city, Prague.
Until the Velvet Revolution of 1989, the foreign policy of Czechoslovakia had followed that of the Soviet Union. Since the revolution and the subsequent mutually-agreed peaceful dissolution of Czechoslovakia into the Czech Republic and Slovakia, the Czechs have made integration with Western institutions their chief foreign policy objective. This goal was rapidly met with great success, as the nation joined NATO in 1999 and the European Union in 2004, and held the Presidency of the European Union during the first half of 2009.
The Czech Republic participates in the United Nations (UN); World Trade Organization (WTO); International Monetary Fund (IMF); Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD); International Energy Agency (IEA); North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the International Whaling Commission.
The Czech Republic is a member of the United Nations and participates in its specialized agencies. It is a member of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
The Czech Republic became a member of the EU in May 2004. This followed signature of the Treaty of Accession with nine other candidate nations in 1993. Although there have been disagreements with established EU member nations over some economic issues, such as agricultural quotas and a recent amendment to the gaming law, relations are good.
The Czech Republic became a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation, along with Poland and Hungary, on 12 March 1999. This membership represents a milestone in the country's foreign policy and security orientation.
Throughout the past decades, Liechtenstein continuously claimed restitution for  (which is ten times the size of Liechtenstein) of land currently located in the Czech Republic that was partially confiscated from the Liechtenstein family in 1918 with the rest of the property being confiscated in 1945 after the expulsion of Germans and confiscation of German property; the Czech Republic insisted that it could not acknowledge or be responsible for claims going back to before February 1948, when the Communists had seized power.
As a result, Liechtenstein did not diplomatically recognize the existence of the Czech Republic as a new state (and, for that matter, also that of the Slovak Republic) until 2009.
In July 2009, the Prince of Liechtenstein announced he was resigning to the previous unsuccessful claims to property located in the Czech Republic, and on 13 July 2009, after politically recognizing one another, the Czech Republic and Liechtenstein formally established diplomatic relations.
In February 2007, the US started formal negotiations with Czech Republic and Poland concerning construction of missile shield installations in those countries for a Ground-Based Midcourse Defense System. Government of the Czech Republic agrees (while 67% Czechs disagree and only about 22% support it) to host a missile defense radar on its territory while a base of missile interceptors is supposed to be built in Poland. The objective is reportedly to protect another parts of US National Missile Defense from long-range missile strikes from Iran and North Korea, but Czech PM Mirek Topolnek said the main reason is to avoid Russian influence and strengthen ties to US.
The main government supporter Alexandr Vondra, Deputy Prime Minister for European affairs, used to be an ambassador to the USA. More problematic is that between 2004 and 2006 he was an executive director of a lobbying company Dutko Worldwide Prague. Dutko's and its strategic partner AMI Communications (PR company) customers are Boeing, Lockheed Martin, Nortrop Grumman, which are largest contractors for NMD development. AMI Communications also received (without a formal selection procedure) a government contract to persuade Czechs to support US radar base.
See AlbaniaCzech Republic relationsThe multi-national Communist armed forces sole joint action was the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in August 1968. All member countries, with the exception of the People's Republic of Albania and the Socialist Republic of Romania participated in the invasion. Albania formally withdrew from the Warsaw Pact in 1968 over the matter.
See AustriaCzech Republic relations
Austria has an embassy in Prague and two honorary consulates (in Brno and esk Budjovice). The Czech Republic has an embassy in Vienna and five honorary consulates (in Graz, Innsbruck, Klagenfurt, Linz, and Salzburg).Both countries are full members of the European Union. They share  of common border, which can be crossed anywhere without border control due to the Schengen Agreement.
See BulgariaCzech Republic relations
Diplomatic relations between Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia were established on 27 September 1920, they were severed on 1 June 1939 and were restored on 10 October 1945. On 23 December 1992 Bulgaria recognised the Czech Republic and established diplomatic relations with it at the level of embassies as of 1 January 1993. Bulgaria has an embassy and an honorary consulate in Prague. Czech Republic has an embassy in Sofia and an honorary consulate in Varna.
See Czech RepublicDenmark relations
See Czech RepublicFrance relations
See CzechGerman relations
See Czech RepublicGreece relations
See Czech RepublicIceland relations
See CzechKosovan relations
See PolandCzech Republic relations
Both countries are full members of the European Union. They share  of common border, which can be crossed anywhere without border control due to the Schengen Agreement.
See Czech RepublicRussia relations
The present day relations between the two countries are at their best, and many agreements have been signed. Russia also has further reduced its oil deliveries to the Czech Republic. The Czech Republic has an embassy in Moscow, and two consulate generals (in Saint Petersburg and Yekaterinburg). The Russian Federation has an embassy in Prague, and two consulate generals in (Brno and Karlovy Vary).
See Czech RepublicSlovakia relations
Before 1918, both countries were part of AustriaHungary, and between 1918 and 1 January 1993, both countries were part of Czechoslovakia.
See Czech RepublicUnited Kingdom relations
HM Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom paid a state visit to the Czech Republic in March 1996.
Diplomatic relations between Czechoslovakia and Mexico were established in 1922. Mexico re-recognised Czech independence in 1993 after its separation with Slovakia. 
U.S. President Woodrow Wilson and the United States played a major role in the establishment of Czechoslovakia on 28 October 1918.
See Czech RepublicIndia relations
See Czech RepublicIran relations
See Czech RepublicIsrael relations
The government of Czechoslovakia recognised independence of Israel 5 days after its declaration on 19 May 1948. Diplomatic relations between both countries were established on 3 July 1948. Czechoslovakia supported with military aircraft and weapons newly created Israeli state for several months, however then-new communist government ceased this support and in few years even the diplomatic relations were broken. Communist regime did spread anti-Israeli propaganda, like all then socialist countries. After the Velvet revolution, the relations were renewed. The Czech Republic has an embassy in Tel Aviv and 4 honorary consulates (in Eilat, Haifa, Jerusalem and Ramat Gan). Israel has an embassy in Prague.
In December 2008 the Czech Air Force wanted to train in desert conditions for the upcoming mission in Afghanistan. No country agreed to help, except Israel. Israel saw it as an opportunity to thank the Czechs for training Israeli pilots when the country was first established.
There are 3,000 Jews living in the Czech Republic (see also History of the Jews in the Czech Republic).
See Czech RepublicJapan relations
See Czech RepublicKazakhstan relations
See Czech RepublicMalaysia relations
See Czech RepublicMongolia relations
See Czech RepublicPhilippines relations
See Pakistan-Czech Republic relations
See Czech RepublicSouth Korea relations 
See Czech RepublicTaiwan relations
See Czech RepublicTurkey relations
See Czech RepublicVietnam relations
