HP Enterprise Services is the global business and technology services subsidiary of the HP Enterprise, (now Hewlett Packard Enterprise), strategic business unit. It was formed by the combination of HP's legacy services consulting and outsourcing business and the integration of acquired Electronic Data Systems, which had defined the outsourcing business when it was established in 1962 by H. Ross Perot.
As of 2009, HP Enterprise Services employed 139,500 people in 60 countries, the largest locations being the United States, India and the UK. It was ranked as one of the largest service companies on the Fortune 500 list with around 2,000 clients. In 2010, HP Enterprise Services was ranked first in Corporate Responsibility Magazines "Corporate Citizens in Government Contracting" listing.
On May 24, 2016, Hewlett Packard Enterprise announced that it will split its Enterprise Services division and merge it with CSC to create a new pure-play IT services company.
On May 13, 2008, Hewlett-Packard Co. confirmed that it had reached a deal with Electronic Data Systems to acquire the company for $13.9 billion. The deal was completed on August 26, 2008. EDS became an HP business unit and was renamed EDS, an HP company. Ronald A. Rittenmeyer, EDS Chairman, President, and CEO, remained at the helm and reported to HP CEO Mark Hurd until his retirement.
As of 23 September 2009, EDS began going to market as HP Enterprise Services, a name change which came one year after HP announced the acquisition of EDS and was a critical milestone as the integration of EDS into HP neared completion.
For 2006, $9.6 billion of revenue came from the Americas (Canada, Latin America, and the United States); $8 billion from Europe, Middle East, and Africa; $1.5 billion from Asia-Pacific; Services' revenue was: Infrastructure $12 billion, Applications Software $5.9 billion, Business Process Outsourcing $3 billion and all other $421 million.
HP ES operates in 60 countries, centered in the metropolitan areas of Dallas-Fort Worth; Detroit; Des Moines and Clarion, Iowa; Salt Lake City; Indianapolis; Winchester, Kentucky; Tulsa, Oklahoma; Boise, Idaho; and Northern Virginia in the United States. Other major facilities are in Romania, Argentina, Colombia, Panama, Costa Rica, India, Brazil, Mexico, Canada, Egypt, Germany, the United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, Hungary, Slovakia, Spain, Israel, South Africa, Italy, Malaysia and the Philippines.
HPES's Plano, Texas campus is located about  north of downtown Dallas. The campus consists of  of office and data center space on  of land. It is the center of the  Legacy in Plano real estate development, which EDS built.
HP Enterprise Services catalogs its services into three service portfolios which are,
HP Enterprise Services is a key implementer of the "Instant-On Enterprise." This HP Enterprise Business initiative seeks to highlight the fundamental shifts in the way information technology is being used to meet changing business models and the growing role of technology to drive business decisions and help organizations achieve economic growth, improve efficiency, and to further the development of society through the use of technology. In a larger context, the initiative seeks to help forward-thinking companies and government agencies have a more evolutionary, business-driven approach to how they deliver IT services, including solutions to modernize, transform, secure, and maximize the use of technology.
HP Enterprise Services has established two levels of business alliances relationships: Agility Alliances and Technology Alliances.
The Agility Alliance brings together strategic solution providers to build and deliver end to end IT solutions for HP ES customers. The list of partners consists of: Deloitte, Microsoft, Oracle Corporation, PricewaterhouseCoopers, SAP, and Symantec.
This effort is supported by the Top Gun Program, which enables HP Enterprise Services technical personnel to dedicate three months of their time on joint projects with an Agility Alliance partner on a key technology problem, to create an innovative customer solution.
The Technology Alliance brings together technology partners focused on collaborating with HP ES to develop, implement and jointly market services.These technology partners are: Citrix, Red Hat, Tibco, and VMware.
HPES's clients are located around the globe and many are very large companies and governments that need services from a company of HP's scale. Some of HPES's largest clients include: American Airlines, Rolls-Royce plc, General Motors, Bank of America, FEMSA, Commonwealth Bank, Kraft, United States Navy, the UK Ministry of Defence, IDA, Royal Dutch Shell, and NASA.
In 2011, HP Enterprise Business, along with participating independent user groups, combined its annual HP Software Universe, HP Technology Forum and HP Technology@Work into a single event, HP Discover. There will be two HP Discover events annually, one for the Americas and one for Europe, Middle East and Africa (EMEA). HP DISCOVER 2011 Americas is slated for June 610, in Las Vegas at the Venetian/Palazzo. The event will offer approximately 200 software-related sessions on application transformation, Converged Infrastructure, information optimization, mobile devices, webOS, global data centers, security, hybrid delivery and cloud computing.HP anticipates approximately 10,000 customers, partners and IT thought leaders will attend HP Discover 2011 in Las Vegas and approximately 5,000 will attend the EMEA event. The Americas conference will have tracks designed for several industries including automotive and aerospace; communications, media & entertainment, energy, financial services, healthcare and life sciences, high tech and electronics, public sector, retail and consumer goods, and transportation and logistics. Nearly 800 sessions, hands-on training and exhibits will feature all areas of the HP Enterprise Business portfolio including servers, storage, networking, software and services.
The HP Discover 2011 event in EMEA is slated to take place in Vienna, Austria, at the Reed Exhibitions, Messe Wien Congress Center, on November 29 through December 1, 2011.
http://www.statista.com/statistics/264922/number-of-employees-at-hewlett-packard-since-2001/shows a much larger number
