In mathematical physics and mathematics, the Pauli matrices are a set of three  complex matrices which are Hermitian and unitary. Usually indicated by the Greek letter sigma (), they are occasionally denoted by tau () when used in connection with isospin symmetries. They are
These matrices are named after the physicist Wolfgang Pauli. In quantum mechanics, they occur in the Pauli equation which takes into account the interaction of the spin of a particle with an external electromagnetic field.
Each Pauli matrix is Hermitian, and together with the identity matrix  (sometimes considered as the zeroth Pauli matrix ), the Pauli matrices (multiplied by real coefficients) form a basis for the vector space of  Hermitian matrices.
Hermitian operators represent observables, so the Pauli matrices span the space of observables of the -dimensional complex Hilbert space. In the context of Pauli's work,  represents the observable corresponding to spin along the th coordinate axis in three-dimensional Euclidean space .
The Pauli matrices (after multiplication by  to make them anti-Hermitian), also generate transformations in the sense of Lie algebras: the matrices  form a basis for , which exponentiates to the special unitary group SU(2). The algebra generated by the three matrices  is isomorphic to the Clifford algebra of , called the algebra of physical space.
All three of the Pauli matrices can be compacted into a single expression:
where  is the imaginary unit, and  is the Kronecker delta, which equals +1 if  and 0 otherwise. This expression is useful for "selecting" any one of the matrices numerically by substituting values of , in turn useful when any of the matrices (but no particular one) is to be used in algebraic manipulations.
The matrices are involutory:
where  is the identity matrix.
From above we can deduce that the eigenvalues of each  are .
Each of the (Hermitian) Pauli matrices has two eigenvalues,  and . The corresponding normalized eigenvectors are:
The Pauli vector is defined by
and provides a mapping mechanism from a vector basis to a Pauli matrix basis as follows,
using the summation convention. Further,
and also (see completeness, below) 
Its (unnormalized) eigenvectors are 
The Pauli matrices obey the following commutation relations:
and anticommutation relations:
where  is the Levi-Civita symbol, Einstein summation notation is used,  is the Kronecker delta, and  is the  identity matrix.
For example,
Pauli vectors elegantly map these commutation and anticommutation relations to corresponding vector products. Adding the commutator to the anticommutator gives
so that, 
Contracting each side of the equation with components of two -vectors  and  (which commute with the Pauli matrices, i.e.,  for each matrix  and vector component  (and likewise with ), and relabeling indices , to prevent notational conflicts, yields
Finally, translating the index notation for the dot product and cross product results in 
Following traces can be derived using the commutation and anticommutation relations.
For 
one has, for even powers,
which can be shown first for the  case using the anticommutation relations.
Thus, for odd powers,
Matrix exponentiating, and using the Taylor series for sine and cosine,
and, in the last line, the first sum is the cosine, while the second sum is the sine; so, finally,
which is analogous to Euler's formula. Note 
while the determinant of the exponential itself is just , which makes it the generic group element of SU(2).
A more abstract version of formula  for a general  matrix can be found in the article on matrix exponentials. A general version of  for an analytic (at a and a) function is provided by application of Sylvester's formula,
A straightforward application of formula  provides a parameterization of the composition law of the group . One may directly solve for  in 
which specifies the generic group multiplication, where, manifestly, 
the spherical law of cosines. Given , then, 
Consequently, the composite rotation parameters in this group element (a closed form of the respective BCH expansion in this case) simply amount to 
(Of course, when  is parallel to , so is , and .)
The fact that any  complex Hermitian matrices can be expressed in terms of the identity matrix and the Pauli matrices also leads to the Bloch sphere representation of  mixed states' density matrix, ( positive semidefinite matrices with trace ). This can be seen by simply first writing an arbitrary Hermitian matrix as a real linear combination of  as above, and then imposing the positive-semidefinite and trace  conditions.
An alternative notation that is commonly used for the Pauli matrices is to write the vector index  in the superscript, and the matrix indices as subscripts, so that the element in row  and column  of the -th Pauli matrix is .
In this notation, the completeness relation for the Pauli matrices can be written
As noted above, it is common to denote the 2 × 2 unit matrix by 0, so 0 = . The completeness relation can alternatively be expressed as
Let  be the transposition (also known as a permutation) between two spins  and  living in the tensor product space ,
This operator can also be written more explicitly as Dirac's spin exchange operator,
Its eigenvalues are therefore 1 or 1. It may thus be utilized as an interaction term in a Hamiltonian, splitting the energy eigenvalues of its symmetric versus antisymmetric eigenstates.
The group SU(2) is the Lie group of unitary 22 matrices with unit determinant; its Lie algebra is the set of all 22 anti-Hermitian matrices with trace 0. Direct calculation, as above, shows that the Lie algebra  is the 3-dimensional real algebra spanned by the set }. In compact notation,
As a result, each  can be seen as an infinitesimal generator of SU(2). The elements of SU(2) are exponentials of linear combinations of these three generators, and multiply as indicated above in discussing the Pauli vector. Although this suffices to generate SU(2), it is not a proper representation of , as the Pauli eigenvalues are scaled unconventionally. The conventional normalization is  , so that
As SU(2) is a compact group, its Cartan decomposition is trivial.
The Lie algebra  is isomorphic to the Lie algebra , which corresponds to the Lie group SO(3), the group of rotations in three-dimensional space. In other words, one can say that the  are a realization (and, in fact, the lowest-dimensional realization) of infinitesimal rotations in three-dimensional space. However, even though  and  are isomorphic as Lie algebras,  and  are not isomorphic as Lie groups.  is actually a double cover of , meaning that there is a two-to-one group homomorphism from  to , see relationship between SO(3) and SU(2).
The real linear span of  is isomorphic to the real algebra of quaternions . The isomorphism from  to this set is given by the following map (notice the reversed signs for the Pauli matrices):
Alternatively, the isomorphism can be achieved by a map using the Pauli matrices in reversed order,
As the quaternions of unit norm is group-isomorphic to , this gives yet another way of describing  via the Pauli matrices. The two-to-one homomorphism from  to  can also be explicitly given in terms of the Pauli matrices in this formulation.
Quaternions form a division algebraevery non-zero element has an inversewhereas Pauli matrices do not. For a quaternionic version of the algebra generated by Pauli matrices see biquaternions, which is a venerable algebra of eight real dimensions.
In quantum mechanics, each Pauli matrix is related to an angular momentum operator that corresponds to an observable describing the spin of a spin particle, in each of the three spatial directions. As an immediate consequence of the Cartan decomposition mentioned above,  are the generators of a projective representation (spin representation) of the rotation group SO(3) acting on non-relativistic particles with spin . The states of the particles are represented as two-component spinors. In the same way, the Pauli matrices are related to the isospin operator.
An interesting property of spin particles is that they must be rotated by an angle of 4 in order to return to their original configuration. This is due to the two-to-one correspondence between SU(2) and SO(3) mentioned above, and the fact that, although one visualizes spin up/down as the north/south pole on the 2-sphere  2, they are actually represented by orthogonal vectors in the two dimensional complex Hilbert space.
For a spin particle, the spin operator is given by , the fundamental representation of ''SU(2)''. By taking Kronecker products of this representation with itself repeatedly, one may construct all higher irreducible representations. That is, the resulting spin operators for higher spin systems in three spatial dimensions, for arbitrarily large j, can be calculated using this spin operator and ladder operators. They can be found in Rotation group SO(3)#A note on representations. The analog formula to the above generalization of Euler's formula for Pauli matrices, the group element in terms of spin matrices, is tractable, but less simple.
Also useful in the quantum mechanics of multiparticle systems, the general Pauli group  is defined to consist of all -fold tensor products of Pauli matrices.
