Transport in Poland involves air traffic, waterways, roads and railroads.
As a country located at the 'cross-roads' of Europe, Poland, with its highly developed economy, is a nation with a large and increasingly modern network of transport infrastructure.
The country's most important waterway is the river Vistula. The largest seaports are the Port of Szczecin and Port of Gdask. Air travel is generally used for international travel, with many flights originating at Warsaw Chopin Airport. Railways connect all of Poland's major cities and the state-owned Polish State Railways (PKP) corporation, through its subsidiaries, runs a great number of domestic and international services of varying speed and comfort. In addition to this, five out of sixteen Polish voivodeships have their own provincial rail service providers. Many major Polish cities have rapid transit systems (typically tram networks) and public transport is available in nearly all areas throughout the country.
Polish public roads are grouped into categories related to administrative division. Poland has  of public roads, of which  are unsurfaced (2011):
According to national roads state report by GDDKiA in 2008 1/4 of national roads were capable of handling 11.5 tonnes per axle loads.
In recent years, the network has been improving and government spending on road construction recently saw a huge increase, due to rapid development of the country and the inflow of European Union funds for infrastructure projects.
Polish motorways and expressways are part of national roads network. As of December 2012, there are  of motorways (autostrady, singular - autostrada) and  of expressways (drogi ekspresowe, singular - droga ekspresowa).
 Motorways in Poland,  (2012):A1 | A2 | A4 | A6 | A8 | A18
 Expressways in Poland,  (2012):S1 | S2 | S3 | S5 |S6 | S7 | S8 | S10 |S11 | S12 | S14 |S17 | S19 | S22 |S51 | S61 | S69 | S74 | S79 | S86
The most important airport in Poland is Warsaw 'Frederic Chopin' International Airport. Warsaw's airport is the main international hub for LOT Polish Airlines.
In addition to Warsaw Chopin, Wrocaw, Gdask, Katowice, Krakw and Pozna all have international airports.
In preparation for the Euro 2012 football championships jointly hosted by Poland and Ukraine, a number of airports around the country were renovated and redeveloped. This included the building of new terminals with an increased number of jetways and stands at both Copernicus Airport in Wrocaw and Lech Wasa Airport in Gdask.
The Polish airline market was until 2004 a closed market, with bilateral agreements between countries served from the national hub Warsaw. The regional airports were mostly serving as spokes, and were controlled by PPL, the state-owned airport authority. However, in the 1990s it was decided to deregulate the airport market and abolish the dominant position of PPL. Nearly all local airports (apart from Zielona Gra airport) became separate companies, with local governments involved in their management, which led to the partial decentralisation. Soon after opening of Polish sky for competition, flights avoiding the Warsaw hub became more common.
There are twelve passenger airports in operation, and there is also an airport Heringsdorf in German village Garz, 7 kilometers from Polish seaside spa winoujcie.
List of airports in PolandThe following are the largest airports in Poland (In descending order for 2013):
Domestic:
Airports with paved runways:Total: 84 (2005)
Airports with unpaved runways:Total: 39 (2005)
Heliports: 2 (2005)
Marine transport in Poland has two main sub-groups, riverine and seaborne. On the Baltic Sea coast, a number of large seaports exist to serve the international freight and passenger trade; these are typically deep water ports and are able to serve very large ships, including the ro-ro ferries of Unity Line, Polferries and Stena Line which operate the Poland Scandinavia passenger lines.
Riverine services operate on almost all major Polish rivers and canals (such as the DanubeOder and Elblg canals) as well as on domestic coastal routes.
Poland has  of navigable rivers and canals (as of 2009).
Total: 57 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,120,165 GRT/
Ships by type:bulk 50, cargo 2, chemical tanker 2, roll-on/roll-off 1, short-sea passenger 2(1999 est.)
Poland is served by an extensive network of railways. In most cities the main railway station is located near a city centre and is well connected to the local transportation system. The infrastructure is operated by PKP PLK ( PKP-Polskie Linie Kolejowe : PKP-Polish Rail Lines), part of state-run PKP Group. The rail network is very dense in western and northern Poland, while eastern part of the country is less developed.
The only high-speed rail line (though by most definitions, real high-speed rail only includes speeds over 200 km/h) in central-eastern Europe is the Central Rail Line (Poland), Centralna Magistrala Kolejowa (CMK). It has a length of , and was built in 19711977; it links Warsaw with Krakw and Katowice. Most trains on the CMK operate at speeds up to , but since December 2014 new Alstom Pendolino ED250 trains operate on a 90 km section of the CMK at , and improvements under way should raise the authorized speed to  on most of the line. In test runs on the CMK in November 2013 a new Pendolino ED250 train set a new Polish speed record of .
Other high-speed lines:
ProjectsThe Warsawd line is being upgraded to allow speed up to 160 km/h (in order to bind together the Warsawd agglomeration).
Plans were made to construct a new high-speed line (350 km/h) from Warsaw to Pozna and Wrocaw with forks in d and Kalisz., but the project was cancelled in November 2011 due to its high cost.
The PKP Group is the fourth largest railway throughout Europe. Trains are run by its different subsidiaries.
The following companies operate in Poland:
There are hundreds of kilometres of , , , and  narrow gauge lines in Poland.These railways are mostly in decline, some surviva as a museum or tourist railways.
Except for Linia Hutnicza Szerokotorowa, and a few very short stretches near border crossings, Poland uses the standard gauge for its railways. Therefore, Linia Hutnicza Szerokotorowa (known by its acronym LHS, English: Broad gauge steelworks line) in Sawkw is the longest broad gauge railway line in Poland. The line runs on a single track for almost  from the Polish-Ukrainian border, crossing it just east of Hrubieszw. It is the westernmost broad gauge railway line in Europe that is connected to the broad gauge rail system of the countries of the former Soviet Union.
Total: 
As of December 2002 narrow gauge railways were no longer owned or operated by PKP. They were transferred to regional authorities or became independent companies.
Most Polish towns and cities have well developed municipal bus services. Typically, a city possesses its own local bus company, however, in some cases they have private competitors operating on certain lines upon the agreement with local authorities.
Until the 1990s, interurban connections were operated by a single, state-owned company PKS. Since then, it has been broken into a number of independent national and municipal enterprises. In addition, several private operators emerged. There are two classes of service distinguished by vehicle length:
While they often use the same bus stops, they tend to use different stations.
Bigger cities run dense tram networks, which are the primary mean of public transport. Currently, there are 14 systems serving over 30 cities including Bydgoszcz, Gdask, Katowice, Krakw, d, Pozna, Szczecin, Warsaw and Wrocaw, with the total track length varying from  (Silesian Interurbans) to less than  (Tramways in Grudzidz). A new network has been constructed in Olsztyn in 2015. See the list of town tramway systems in Poland
Since the 1990s, a number of cities attempts to upgrade certain parts of their networks to the light rail standard (called szybkie tramwaje, En. fast trams). The most notable investments are Pozna Fast Tram and Krakw Fast Tram with the underground  premetro section.
Trolleybuses can be found in three cities: Gdynia (with some lines reaching Sopot), Lublin and Tychy.
The first metro line was opened in Warsaw in 1995. The second line was opened in 2015. There are no official plans to build metro in other cities due to the lack of funds, but there is an ongoing debate whether they should be built, especially in Krakw and Wrocaw.
(2006 est.)
